Cool.
Okay, so for those of you not aware, North Sky is social.
So we're basically a cooperative based in, actually established in BC
Canada here in Vancouver.
So our priority is basically really about building a community for two-
spirit LGBTQI plus people and marginalized identities.
I want to focus on the second, or sort of emphasis on
the second, as I feel over the past year has sort of
been pigeonholed into the queer community.
Quite a few other things, like I myself, you know, I'm
actually Sudanese-American.
Both of my parents are from Sudan, born and raised, actually, in
America and grew up in Washington State, so like nine hours away
from here.
Yeah, so if you kind of look at where Blue Sky, I
need to walk up front here, sorry.
So kind of look at Blue Sky sort of like started sending
out invites April, May 2023.
Over time, you know, we kind of saw rapid growth.
And so now around 45 million users.
And it was actually a beginning of last year when North Sky
sort of started to assemble and we kind of found established ourselves.
If we look at the reason for that, there was quite a
few issues that sort of happened.
One of the larger incidents early on was actually when Evita,
who is a basically a black community organizer, sort of discovered that
you could create handles with the N-word, just easily racial sl
urs.
And then Blue Sky did not respond to this for multiple weeks.
Developers were sort of like left to bear the burden of
actually communicating and kind of trying to explain what's happening.
Users were really confused about what these code changes were.
Were they trying to hide things, mask things?
It was just sort of a big, hot mess.
Later on, then actually a series of issues, the hammer incident, one
user base said like, "Hey, I want to hit this person with
a hammer." That resulted in introducing the feature to actually block people.
And basically, throughout all of this, we also saw a lot of
issues around racism, transphobia, discrimination.
And actually, and so a lot of it early on was due
to Blue Sky not having really TNS, trust and safety as
a priority.
And then we sort of saw an acceleration of these issues sort
of happening as they're able to actually, I see it kind
of grew their moderation services and hired more people, which in a
way allowed them to actually do a better job of moderating.
But because they didn't actually understand the context of minorities, they
actually ended up targeting minorities as a consequence of that.
And then we also saw the Jesse's single incident.
So basically, after Trump was elected, a bunch of people moved over
to a single who's basically known bad actor, started to sort
of harass people and you started panicking about him.
And over the course of two days, he was like, he was
basically, he was suspended, unsuspended, suspended again, and unsusp
ended.
And then basically told that, well, he's screenshotting people and
sharing on Twitter, which is actually a separate platform.
So we don't target that, but we've actually seen a
lot of people actually suspended for doing the same things.
And then just after Trump was an inauguration ceremony, every single
major social media platform removed all protections for LGBT people, minorities, basically
they removed them from classification as hate speech.
So it kind of showed that, oh, my screen just died.
Yes, let me fix that very quickly.
Is it back yet?
There it is.
Yeah.
And so it's, and so we see then actually over the
past few, we saw increased targeting of, especially of transgender people during,
throughout all of this.
Charlie Kirk incident, everybody's familiar with that.
The US basically sends a letter to every single major social media
platform saying, "We expect you to handle the Charlie Kirk discourse appropriately.
If you do not, we'll revoke your Section 230 status."
Section 230 basically says that social media platforms are common carriers.
And so to revoke it, suddenly now you as a social
media platform are responsible for whatever your views are saying.
And so what really kind of saw is that every single time
is that minorities are always discarded as soon as anything becomes difficult.
And so when North Skies sort of started to assemble, we
sort of actually began with sort of an idea.
What does it mean if we actually had a space, you know,
we can actually speak freely?
What if we could like, you know, really celebrate our successes, you
know, our challenges, like provide and support one another?
And, you know, and not have people that, you know, shit all
over it, quite simply.
And so it was because I started talking about it.
We kind of like had like a lot of intense discussions and
it kind of came down to like it's not really about,
you know, an individual.
It's really about, you know, caring for the community that they
can thrive in.
And then as a consequence, we actually kind of like encourage these
community dynamics that support those individuals sort of create like a nice
like self-reinforcing positive environment where it's like
you as a person contribute to the community and community return actually
contributes towards your success and protection.
And that was kind of where it was kind of came down
to like how do we actually focus on the needs of the
people sort of looking at the common needs while also sort of
providing an agency at the same time?
So that way sort of like we're not forcing you to
abide by rules, but actually also giving you the ability to actually
kind of participate in them.
And really when we kind of talked about that, it was actually
like, okay, then issues kind of become like, you know, within the
community is like how do we actually sort of de-escal
ate people from like fight or flight as, you know, every single,
actually every single person in North Sky social like the members and
volunteers, we have all been subjected to different types of trauma, you
know, whether it is like racial, sexual, gender-based.
We've all actually kind of like been targeted by this.
And then that kind of means that we have to kind of
like create spaces that allow for decompression at the same time
as when you're existing in a space, you know, whether it
's online or in real life, we're constantly being targeted and
harassed.
There is never any point where you can actually process that in
a healthy manner.
And so that's kind of where when we started actually listening
at like, okay, what does we actually moderate to do moderation, to
church trust and safety with this context?
And so that's where kind of like we're sort of
justice, you know, that was really what we started writing everything out.
That was like the core tenant of it.
And the other part of it was actually human to human moderation
where our actions aren't, you know, opaque.
Like I expect to say like one of the first moderate actions
that we actually took was where we started migrating people over
and one user just like made a post that was actually a
clear violation of our guidelines.
Rather than just using Ozone to take it down, we actually
notified them saying, "Hey, you've made this post.
It violates the guidelines for these reasons.
Can you please remove it?" They immediately deleted it.
And that's where actually we kind of, we gave them the
agency, the choice to actually participate in actually building a healthy community.
And so we say, you know, it's basically like, you know,
let's check in with you.
Let's actually see how you're doing.
And then the other part is really like our focus is really
like, how do we actually handle these inter-community issues, you
know, within the community itself.
As in a way it's, I say it's easier to
moderate the challenges actually targeting your community than it is actually moderate
what's happening within it.
And so when we kind of talk about those spaces, there's
also the other issue sort of, you know, we say like protecting
like from external influences, is we saw like on, on HE protocol
in particular, is actually there's a lot of challenges come with
it.
Like these are two examples from earlier this year, where it's
like one person was like, you know, a person took a picture
of her and proceeded to use AI to dress it up differently.
Another one is a political activist targeted for his activism.
So he's saying, "Hey, I have to actually delete all my
content because we're all being targeted by this." Let me click
that again.
Yeah.
And then the other part is where we basically see AI tech
bros who basically see this firehose where all this
data is in public, I can use it for training purposes.
Not commenting on your status announcement.
And so, and so sort of like, you know, and when this
happened, they're like, "Oh my god, this is amazing thing I
just published." And everybody freaks out.
Fun fact, I emailed Hugging Face's privacy group, basically asking
them if they can remove her GDPR violations.
I never got a response.
Yeah.
And so, by the way, this is an illustration my daughter made
for me for this talk.
She is watching this right now.
Yeah.
And so, really kind of like, we want to have a community
space where people can actually experience joy together.
You know, and actually be able to like discuss not just their
challenges, but their successes, you know, they can create together.
But at the same time, when you start creating these spaces, you
always have people outside of it who want to invade it, who
want to disrupt it, or they may not even be nefar
ious.
I think it was what, last week, Rudy made a post where
he's talking about like the hustle.
And then somebody responds like, "I do not support hustle culture." And
Rudy's like, "Oh, I'm sorry.
I didn't code switch." It's like those types of actions
where it's like, they'll blindly walk into the space.
And that's kind of one of the issues that we kind
of always see happening as we start kind of doing community building.
And so, that's kind of where we then sort of like,
kind of discussion early on was also, like, okay, then we have
feeds, which are great.
You know, they kind of provide for a lot of flexibility.
You know, you can create a feed that has specific content.
Black Sky has their community feed, as an example.
North Sky, we've created our own also.
But at the same time, it's sort of like, people can
still access it.
You know, you can kind of do some logic within it.
But it doesn't really solve the public side of things.
And so that's when we start, okay, how do we actually
shift away from just talking about feeds towards actually creating spaces?
And so it's sort of like, you know, okay, what does
it look like?
You know, how do users interact with these spaces?
Sorry, I'm also kind of spotting because I just wrote
all those two days ago.
Yeah.
And it's like, what are the new ways you can actually
kind of create those, create interactions within these spaces?
So is that sort of like breaking away from actually having a
single feed to actually, okay, how do you actually have a space
that has different ways of actually interacting with that space itself?
And then, in what ways does it actually result in a positive
environment too?
And this is kind of where, I call it Stratos, sort
of a private data solution.
Kind of like, that's where it kind of came out of
that.
As when I originally wrote the proposal, there was like no announcements
yet.
I think it was basically like, Nick had written some things, Paul
had written some things.
It's all kind of very heavy theoretical.
But this is where we kind of talk about, okay, let's
actually do private data in a way that's actually permissioned.
Where you can kind of like, allow for multiple spaces to exist.
But at the same time, have some governance in there too.
And that's kind of where we're saying, okay, I should
actually have the ability to actually moderate this, was one of the
critical aspects of it.
When I published the first proposal, the, one of the common feedback
s, I was like, okay, why don't you do end-to-
end encryption?
I was like, okay, let me actually think about this.
So I looked at the MLS spec, I read it, I
talked to Ian from Pyregos.
And it's quite something that doesn't, it doesn't work
at that type.
So like, end-to-end encryption is essentially, you know, like, I
'm talking to Nick, nobody can take part in it.
And then I add another person to it, another take part in
it.
But they don't see any of the messages from before, because
it's all encrypted if it's satisfied.
And so if you want to moderate it, then whoever the moder
ators, the moderators in service has to be a party of
it.
So that is like, there's always like a third party that
's just kind of view everything.
So at that time, at that point, encryption doesn't work.
And also, how do you also make it so it's easy
to actually, to search it, to browse it, to access it, however
you wish.
And so that's kind of where it was, it was one
of those big things.
And also, like, how do we make it verifiable?
So we didn't want to break away from the protocol at
the same time.
So we kind of made the intentional decision to actually stick with
how ATProto works in a way that others can actually
adopt it.
Because that was actually kind of the critical aspect of where, as
a community of builders, we don't want to build a completely
unique platform at the same time.
We want to build something that can actually be adopted and grown
together with other individuals.
And so I feel like I'm rushing through this, but let
's find out.
Yeah.
So that's basically where we kind of talked about, okay, like,
spaces or feeds.
And so we kind of decide on this hydration model.
Basically, the smoke sense approach is kind of written as where you
basically you have, you know, on the PDS, you have like
a public record, you know, that can just has a reference to
the private one.
And so then app view or an application, it can see the
public one, and it has a reference, and then you can kind
of pull it, pull it in from the, from the public one.
And you end up with your private data at the same time.
So that kind of allows us like that compatibility with AT proto
while also kind of serving the needs of like having a data
privacy with it.
And now for the gutsy part is a demo.
So Luca has been begging me for the last like three days
to record this, but I have refused.
I like doing things live.
Yeah.
So this is basically, please show a post.
Don't terrify me right now.
Yeah.
So here we go.
So this is basically a web app.
I kind of threw it together as a demo purposes, where we
have the idea.
So basically you have like your feeds.
Does this have a laser pointer on it?
Yes, it does.
Nice.
Yeah.
So basically, you know, see like Amelia this morning, she wrote some
posts on here.
It's for fun.
And the idea that I can see right now, this is basically
an app view feed.
It's actually serving all the private content.
And for the sake of this, all this is doing is actually,
it's just serving the data for all the boundaries that I
have access to.
So we use boundaries as mentioned, you know, it's like, it
's a permission space.
And so what it is basically from authorization side, I'm sending
requests.
It says, okay, let me find out all your boundaries.
Okay, here you go.
Here's all your data associated with it.
And that allows me to actually kind of then see it.
And I see here, kind of actually jumping past it.
Sorry, let me jump back for you quickly.
By the way, there's documentation.
Yeah.
So the idea is basically that we have a attestation.
Here we go.
That basically is where as soon as, when a user enrolls
in the service, we create a public record.
It's saying, okay, this is your service.
Here's your boundaries.
Here's your, here's actually your signing key that we create
for you.
And we kind of write that back to the public record.
And that sort of enables that discovery aspect of it.
With the attestation, you can actually kind of verify it
at the same time.
So sec P256K1, and then P256
K1 key for the users.
Every user has their own key.
That's where we say verifiable.
As in, you know what your public key is, and you can
always actually validate that.
Your records belong to you.
And that was sort of like trying to build this trust model
at the same time.
Okay, back behind the desk.
Yeah.
And so if you look here, we have a little nice little
enrollment record.
We can actually see that.
So this is one, you know, strato service.
These are my two boundaries that I have access to.
And then down below is attestation, basically providing verification of
it.
And then this nice little thing that also shows it.
By the way, I forked PDSLS and I added
strato support to it.
So it actually, it fully works.
Yeah.
It's basically showing the verification, basically does client side, checks the
service, did web document, actually validate it and shows that, yes, this
is actually verified.
Yeah.
And then basically then, if on the demo app, basically then see
up here, it does a little check, does its own verification.
And then also from the service, it also validates, yes, you
are enrolled.
And then we see on here, these are the different, basically, these
are the domains that a person has access to.
And then the actual, and the additional ones that are available.
And this basically then allows you to actually basically write a little
private post with it.
Yes.
There we go.
And then, here we go.
And then I'm just going to do a thing of, I
'm going to give, sorry, actually let me do this really fast.
But this is where a user is already enrolled in the service.
So I'm going to log out and just log in with
a different one.
Oh.
There we go.
Full OAuth, scoped enrollment.
Only the Stratos lexicons have access, of course.
I'm going to go ahead and authorize that.
And then I'm logged in.
And we see here that I don't have access to anything.
So I'm not enrolled.
I only see my public records.
And we've, and right now the service is actually designed where
you can actually have a open enrollment with exclusive domains.
So the const is basically like, I can actually, I can freely
enroll in this one.
So let's do that again.
And this is currently necessary because the enrollment process basically generates
a long-lived OAuth token.
So that way, behind the scenes, whenever you actually create a private
record, it also basically writes the public one for you, on your
behalf.
So sort of like OAuth delegation, or as they call it,
OAuth wizardry, because this whole setup is insane, honestly.
Yeah.
Oh, and Amelia's now showing off that she's actually posting
at the same time.
Yeah.
And so basically, we see here, like, I only have access to,
you know, the open enrollment domain.
And then there's, of course, like always going to be an
admin interface where, let me get that.
There we go.
I'm going to add myself to the bees domain.
That was a wrong did.
Hang on a second.
Let me find that one.
Actually, I really like doing live demos because
something always goes wrong.
Let me delete that.
It's just differently, right?
Yes.
I also appreciate actually showing that this actually works.
There we go.
Back to the demo app.
I refresh that.
And now I see bees.
And yeah.
Yeah.
And so basically, and actually, there isn't really anything right there
in there was, but it's because I write, because I post
a lot more on this account.
That's why.
But then if I go back to the previous one.
I'm going to log back in there.
Yeah.
We added it.
And it's taking a while to populate.
Oh, I don't have any content there.
Right.
Because if I clear this out for the demo, just in case.
But anyways, but actually, anybody can actually log into this app.
I'll tear it down in like in a day or two.
But that's basically like the concept behind it, is that we
actually wanted to basically allow people to to basically adopt this, integrate
it in any way they wish.
Because it's sort of like when we started actually thinking about
this, actually, the whole reason I built this is because when I
met Boris back in November at Eurosky in Berlin, I was
like, let's talk about what's happened with a private data
working group.
And what I learned is that nobody could actually decide on an
approach.
As we're sort of disagreeing.
And I basically told Boris, like, I'm going to prove it
's possible by having a demo at Atmoser Conf.
Yeah.
And it's not so much to say that it's not
hard.
I just like really difficult things.
That's really what it comes down to.
And it was like, it was a, and so I'd say
this is just one approach to it.
There's quite a few others, actually, like, I posted the proposal
in January, and then within a couple weeks, there are six more
proposals out there and announcements.
So it's kind of a bit crazy, like, you know, but
actually, at the same time, they all have different requirements for it.
One group wants to have like, you know, more of like a
private social media space.
Another one actually wants to have actually the ability to actually restrict
the data between your device and its target.
And blue skies, you know, approach is more like, how do we
actually give more agency to the users with primitives?
And for us, it's actually where, how do we actually provide
spaces for a community with actually the ability to do that kind
of a governance, to kind of like, you know, take care and
support the community at the same time?
Yeah, let me jump back to this thing.
I do have a couple other slides.
Let me see.
Yeah, and so I kind of really want to put stress on
like, shout outs to a few individuals throughout all this.
So like Nick, for example, I hopped on quite a few
calls with him, because it was something where I would say that
the most difficult part was actually thinking about how does this actually
work at scale?
Because there's one thing that basically, okay, we're going to
have like, some private data, and it kind of sits around.
But then it's like, how do you actually handle it?
We can have like, thousands of people working, using this at the
same time.
And this is where Nick was really instrumental, kind of like, you
know, talking me through hashing algorithms, which I've only like,
briefly read about before.
And he gave me like, a long list.
I spent an entire week reading research papers.
Yeah, and like Lewis, because actually, I was working on this locally,
and then I deployed it to the cloud to test some things,
and suddenly I had horrific issues.
And I think it was like, last week, I just tagged him
on the Discord, and I was like, Lewis, how are you doing
Postgres with Tranquil?
And he was kind of providing some advice there.
And also a fake, of course, for listening to me complain about
issues nonstop.
And then Emilia, who's, you know, Emilia is Em
ilia, honestly.
What does she not know?
Yeah, and then Boris, I don't know about this, because I
made a challenge, he basically maybe challenged myself with this.
Yeah, but this is, it's really kind of comes back to
is where private data is a very important thing in many contexts.
For us, it is actually, you know, how to, providing a private
space for communities.
For others, it is, you know, providing, you know, a private space
for, for research, right?
AT science, it's actually a common topic that came up yesterday
on Friday for them.
And so this is where we kind of say, like, let's
actually build an open the way that can actually be adopted.
Yeah, and if you want to learn more, you can look at
the documentation that I published on Friday morning, because I have horrible
jet lag, and I just kept writing things.
Yeah.
And so thank you, everybody.